Welcome to another code walkthrough for C programming for everybody.
In this code walkthrough, we are going to compare how Guido implemented list in the earliest versions of Python
versus how I implemented list while teaching Chapter 6 of Carnegie and Ritchie.
And so this was, if you watched the video of my interview with Guido Van Rossum,
this was like my greatest, like, revelation. Like, what?
And so the big revelation is, is that Python's list object in, you know, Python 0.01 was an array of pointers.
And if we look at the Carnegie and Ritchie list item, this was a linked list. I did a linked list.
And so the actual KR list struct has a pointer to the head and the tail of its linked list and account.
And again, this is classic linked list. And to some degree, while I was teaching this in Carnegie and Ritchie Chapter 6,
I was really teaching you linked lists and using the Python list abstraction to teach it.
And so we have two data structures. We have this node, which just has a pointer to a text saved and a pointer to the next one.
So this is like classic linked list. I'm not going to I'm not going to go through that again.
So you just go back and watch the Chapter 6 stuff. And I talk about linked lists all the time.
But that's not how Python does it, did it or does it.
And it's not clear to me exactly why, but he I think he was just trying to build the simplest possible data structure.
And we'll look at some code and you'll see that there is a certain simplicity, like already in just the struct definition.
We see the struct P1 list. There's only one of them. If it's a linked list, you have sort of a struct for the node and a struct for the list itself.
The constructor P1 list new. Well, we're just going to malloc the object and then we're going to say, OK, let's allocate.
Let's allocate to an array of pointers to characters.
And so so if we look at the struct P1 list and we see char star star items, that is syntax for a array of pointers.
OK, and so you think of each pointer as either 32 bits in the old days or 64 bits in the modern days.
So that's an array. And so so what I'm doing in this P items equals malloc open print P alloc times size of char star.
That means I'm allocating two elements that are pointers, which means, again, two times 64 bits in the modern world.
And noting that I have two in there and length, which is the Python view of the number of items is zero.
So we've got we've got space for two and we have zero.
And that's an array that we know Alec tells us how long the array is and length tells us how much of the array we've used.
And just to go back, I'll try not to compare and contrast too much.
But just think about the complexity of linked lists the way I did them in Kernighan and Ritchie, my Kernighan and Ritchie Chapter 6.
You have this thing called head. You have this thing called tail, which is null and count is zero.
And again, for those of us who know linked list, this is obvious.
It's what you do. But an array is simpler than a linked list.
And so, you know, there we go.
OK, OK, OK, OK. So that's what we're what we've got when we're done with our constructor.
We've got an array of two pointers, two characters. Allocated to and length one.
So let's go take a look at let's take a look at the main code right now.
And so the key to this main code is that in a sense, here's the Kernighan and Ritchie main code,
because this is like an interface and an abstraction, the main code should be pretty much the same.
And the main code pretty much is the same, meaning that we create a linked list, we append some stuff to it,
we print the list, we check the length, we look something up and then we delete it.
And we do both things because below the abstraction, below the interface, both of these implementations,
both the KR list and the P1 list are supposed to provide to us, the caller, the same abstraction.
We can append, we can print, we can check the length, we can check the index and we can delete it.
And it does not matter what the implementation is.
And that's so that's more the builders of the Python runtime get to decide how to do this because we've got a contract with them.
Again, an interface. So let's just take a look at the code.
We're going to add hello world to our list and print it.
Then we're going to add catchphrase and print it.
Then we're going to add Brian and print it.
And then we're going to say, how big is it?
And then we're going to ask, where is Brian in there and where is Bob in there?
And then we're going to delete it.
And if you look at the run, you see, you know, the list starts out as hello world and the list is hello world catchphrase.
And we'll see what this extending because we started with two slots in our array.
And for the first two, you didn't have to get bigger.
But then we're like, oh, wow, we're running out of space.
So we got to like extend this array.
We'll show that code in a bit.
But then we end up with three things in the list.
Again, that's not our job as the caller, three things in the list.
And Brian is in position two, which zero, one, two, hello world is zero, catchphrase is one and Brian is two.
And Bob is not there. So we get back a negative one.
Pretty stuff. OK, so let's take a look at the append code,
because this is where the fun happens.
So here's the append code.
So let's take a look at the let's go back.
How I taught you append, you know, a month or so ago.
And so so again, you got this.
The lecture has pictures of all this. Right.
So if you're appending, if it's empty, your self head is new.
If the self tail is not equal, no, then self tail next equals new and then self tail new equals new.
So that's just like you got to draw the picture and add the little arrows and away you go.
And then you can save the string itself.
But now we look at the P1 list and we we have to extend it if necessary.
Right. So if self length, i.e. is greater than self Alex.
So we allocated two in the first in the in the constructor.
And then if the length is two, we don't have enough space because our next one would be sub two.
And that you can have sub zero and sub one in a two long array.
And so all we're going to do then is we're going to have chunking and Guido mentioned chunking in the video.
We're going to chunk it to add 10. And so we're going to basically extend from two to 10.
So we're going to add 10. We're going to increase the alloc size and then we're going to call realloc.
And realloc is going to take the array of items and say how big that was, free it, move it, whatever.
Extend it depending on what realloc is, how realloc is working.
And we're going to say, OK, we want to have 12 of these things now, 12 and that becomes our new items.
Now, realloc will also so there's two things in it and we extended 12.
realloc will copy the two things.
So we don't have to do any copying because realloc copies the first two things because it knows that items is too long.
And so it copies the first two things and then gives us 10 more.
So there's no copy code here.
And so I think Guido really liked the realloc and a lot of C programmers don't like realloc and he did.
He's like, look, realloc says it's going to do this and I want to do this.
So realloc, realloc, do your job.
And so I think back to my own time as a software developer, I just felt because again, we were taught linked list, linked list, linked list.
I just didn't think about realloc as a useful thing and Guido clearly felt like realloc is the answer.
And it lets him have this simple array mentality.
So you just realloc it and say, look, here's an array of this two, I want it to be 12.
Help me and we're done.
And so that's really simple code.
I think very easy to understand.
And then we make a save string.
And then we just add at the end of the array self length, which in this case is sub 2, is that string.
And then we add one to the length.
So this code is really simple.
And if you were doing debug print, you don't really need any addresses because if you recall when I'm printing in all my linked list stuff,
so that you can debug it and redraw your lines and figure everything out, I'm printing addresses out all the time.
But no, this is just a position.
So this is the 0, the 1, and now the 2 in this case.
And so that's where you see when it says extending from 2 to 12.
That's as a side effect of adding the third item to a list that was pre-allocated with two slots.
OK.
And that's it.
But let's take a look at the print code, right?
Let's look at the print code for both of them.
This is KRList print.
Let's take a look at the print code in Guido van Rossum's version.
OK.
So the key to this is the for loop in P1_List_Print.
The for loop is for i equals 0, semicolon, i less than self length, let's take that blank out, i less than self length, i plus plus.
That is like really basic chapter 4, chapter 5 stuff in Kernighan and Ritchie.
So it's just an array.
So you write a simple incremented for loop.
It's fast, cash efficient.
It's beautifully simple, right?
So in this print, this is obvious.
Now, when I showed you the same thing in Kernighan and Ritchie Chapter 6, I had this for in KRList_Print.
It says for ker equals self arrow head, ker not equal null, ker equals ker next.
And I apologize for this line.
I'm like, you will eventually write this because it's an idiom.
You will write this quite naturally and it'll make a lot of sense to you, right?
But in Python 1, we didn't do that.
It was an array.
And the only place that we have to worry about its dynamic nature, the only place we have to worry about its dynamic nature is in the append, right?
Where we reallocate it.
So everything we're doing here is a simple for loop.
So like even the del command here, the del basically says, let's free all those little items.
Let's free those character strings with a for loop for i equals zero, i less than self length, i plus plus.
Again, a beginning C programmer can understand this code.
And if we look at the C code in KRList_del, we just see a while loop.
And remember, you had to do these in a certain order.
And so the whole free and I talked about all this stuff.
The fact that you got to do it in a certain order.
Well, this is pretty simple, right?
So it frees each of the items.
It's for i equals zero in P1List_del, you free each of the characters strings that we point to.
Then we free the array that's got those pointers, which are now valid because we got rid of them.
And then you free the object itself.
And so to some degree, one can appreciate the simplicity of what Guido did in this by going with arrays.
And again, the key thing that misled me or that Guido just took a different approach, it really came down to Realloc.
And so he believed in, I was trained to not think about Realloc as plan A.
And so I thought linked lists were plan A because then you don't have to do so many Reallocs.
And he was like, I want an array and Realloc says it's going to do this for me.
And away we go.
So I encourage you to take a look at P1List and KRList and put them in two windows next to each other and sort of compare and contrast.
And what I really want you to do as you're comparing and contrasting is I want you to think about the complexity of writing,
debugging, and then later the complexity of understanding and how much knowledge a programmer has to understand to be able to make sense of these two bits of code.
And again, for those of us computer scientists for whom linked lists are very natural, we just write this stuff.
I can write it pretty fast, but that doesn't mean that it's the easiest to learn.
So away we go.
And so I hope you found this comparison interesting.
Cheers.